In this demonstration,
we'll investigate Windows Update on an individual Windows 10 computer.
I'm going to open up Start, and we'll open the Settings application,
come down to the very bottom category, Update and Security.
Now the Check for updates button will obviously perform an ad
hoc check of your Windows Update settings,
but you know that in the middle of the night,
or whenever you have your Windows Automatic Maintenance plan running,
it will also perform a Windows Update operation there.
Now there's update-related settings that we can look at,
View installed update history.
This is interesting,
and I say that guardedly because it shows you what's been installed.
Notice that they're categorized just like we looked at earlier.
We have one Feature Update.
This was my 1709, fall 2017 creator's update.
And then we have Quality Updates, and then Other Updates.
I don't have an awful lot.
When you click these links,
it takes you out to the web in your default browser where
you can read about that particular issue,
which is all well and good,
but sometimes you'll find that you'll need to uninstall and reinstall a
particular quality update in order to get something working,
or in a worse-case scenario you've identified that a
particular update is breaking functionality on your
system and you need to uninstall it.
We do have a link up here, it's easy to miss,
and that will click out to the traditional Control Panel.
So that's a really important spot for you to know about.
Another is the control command.
I'm about to blow your mind I think.
You've probably noticed that it's really difficult to get to
the classic Control Panel in Windows 10,
at least as of this recording in January 2018.
You can go through the Settings application and be lucky enough to find a
link that will click out into classic Control Panel.
It used to be that you could do Windows key+X or right-click+Start
and there was a classic Control Panel item here,
but there no longer is.
When you think System, I normally think of System in the old Control Panel,
it takes you into Settings.
So what I'm trying to get around to say is that you
can always open up a Run prompt, type control,
and that will open up the All Control Panel Items folder.
Isn't that great?
And in there, you have a classic Control Panel called Programs and Features,
and then from there, you have View installed updates,
and then let me maximize this.
I'll normally make sure that the view is doing a reverse sort
on Installed On to see the most recent,
and then you can search for a particular KB number.
KB used to stand for knowledge base.
It's how Microsoft documented all of their updates.
Maybe it still does in 2018.
But anyway, if you select one of these guys,
you'll know that you can uninstall it.
Be careful doing that and making sure you're doing
that under good guidance by the way, seriously.
So let's come back to our previous page.
Some other Update settings you can do are change the active hours,
this is where you tell Windows please don't do an automatic restart.
That's a controversial point,
the fact that by default if Windows Updates applies
an update that requires a restart, it'll just do it automatically.
If you want some guidance on how to turn that off,
it's become increasingly difficult to do by the way,
you'll want to check the exercise files because I give you a link there.
So you'll set this according to your active hours and Windows
will be guaranteed online during that time.
Restart options, you can schedule a restart,
like if you know that some updates have been applied and
Windows tells you that it needs to restart.
You can have it happen at a specific day and time.
You can optionally make some more notifications happen.
These are what are called toast notifications that pop
up above your notification area.
Let's come back here.
Under Advanced options,
this allows you to go beyond just the Windows code
base and give you related updates.
This is a useful tool because you can get driver updates,
you can also get updates for Microsoft Office
applications if you have them installed,
you can pause updates to a limited degree here.
All of this stuff is centrally controllable through Group Policy by the way.
You can customize how often updates happen,
what happens when updates happen, all of that is through Group Policy,
and included in those group policies, like I said earlier,
is the ability to point your Windows 10 clients to a Windows
Server Update Services box instead of the internet.
Now Delivery Optimization, again,
is a somewhat controversial feature in Windows Update.
It's call WUDO, W-U-D-O, Windows Update Delivery Optimization.
It's a way to make the delivery of updates faster because you can do,
in a peer-to-peer fashion, uploads and downloads of those updates.
Now if you trust the machines inside your network,
which I presume you do,
you're going to get a performance boost and you'll have less
network traffic flowing if one PC posts the updates from the
internet or from your WSUS server, and as long as WUDO is installed,
those other PCs can fetch updates peer to peer.
Isn't that neat?
You can, and this is where the controversial piece comes in,
incorporate internet-based hosts too.
Now understand that all of those updates are digitally signed,
and WUDO will not transfer a file that's been modified by even one bit.
Modifying a single bit in code will break a
previously-created digital signature.
So that's the assurance with that.
I'm going to step back a couple steps, and I think that's it.
Those are the major touch points for Windows Update.
Showed you how to roll back updates by accessing the classic Control Panel,
let me bring up an elevated PowerShell prompt because there
is a command called Get-WindowsUpdateLog,
and what this is going to do, it'll actually echo it out,
it'll go into the event log system, find however many files that it finds,
concatenate them together, and then give you a comma-separated value file,
and it tells us the dump file name right here.
So once we get our prompt back, or if I just want to bring up a Run prompt.
I can navigate out to c:\users\tim\AppData\local\temp\WindowsUpdateLog.
I'll do a quick sort by Date modified,
and it looks like it's creating several CSV files.
I think it's still generating the files.
Nope, there it goes.
The WindowsUpdate.
log is written to, oh I guess it wrote the final log to the Desktop.
Well that makes sense.
We shouldn't necessarily have to browse around a temp folder to find that file.
Just out of curiosity, I wonder how big this file is, 775 KB.
That's pretty big for a text file.
Now these delimited files are nice because you can pop them into a table,
a database table,
or put them in Excel and generate reports and do
filters and all that good stuff,
but the Get-WindowsUpdateLog and the resulting delimited output
here can be awfully useful when you're helping customers and
clients because instead of asking them, hey,
did you download kb157231, you know what I mean?
That's never going to work.
If you can get a Windows Update log from that person,
you'll have everything you need to make a diagnosis based on what they've got going on with their Windows updates.